apps/docs/src/content/docs/api/create-flow.mdx, before:

---
title: createFlow
description: API reference for the createFlow function — the entry point for building flows.
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

## Signature

```typescript
function createFlow<TInput, TDeps = Record<string, unknown>>(
  name: string
): FlowBuilder<TInput, TDeps, {}, never>
```

## Parameters

### `name`

**Type:** `string`

A human-readable name for the flow. Used in error messages, observer hooks, and `ctx.meta.flowName`.

## Type parameters

### `TInput`

The shape of the input object passed to `.execute()`. This is available as `ctx.input` in every step handler.

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<{ orderId: string; userId: string }>('process-order');
```

### `TDeps`

The shape of the dependencies object passed as the second argument to `.execute()`. Defaults to `Record<string, unknown>`.

```typescript
type Deps = {
  db: DatabaseClient;
  eventPublisher: FlowEventPublisher;
};

const flow = createFlow<{ orderId: string }, Deps>('process-order');
```

## Returns

A `FlowBuilder` instance with the following initial state:
- State type: `{}` (empty)
- Break outputs: `never` (no early exits defined yet)

Chain builder methods (`.step()`, `.validate()`, etc.) to define the flow, then call `.build()`.

## Example

```typescript
import { createFlow } from '@celom/prose';

const flow = createFlow<{ email: string }>('onboard-user')
  .step('create', async (ctx) => {
    const user = await db.createUser(ctx.input.email);
    return { user };
  })
  .build();

const result = await flow.execute(
  { email: 'alice@example.com' },
  { db }
);
```

Commit message:

docs: enhance documentation and examples, add MCP server guide, and improve type definitions

apps/docs/src/content/docs/api/create-flow.mdx, after:

---
title: createFlow
description: API reference for the createFlow function — the entry point for building flows.
sidebar:
  order: 1
---

## Signature

```typescript
function createFlow<TInput, TDeps extends BaseFlowDependencies = never>(
  name: string
): FlowBuilder<TInput, TDeps, {}, never>
```

## Parameters

### `name`

**Type:** `string`

A human-readable name for the flow. Used in error messages, observer hooks, and `ctx.meta.flowName`.

## Type parameters

### `TInput`

The shape of the input object passed to `.execute()`. This is available as `ctx.input` in every step handler.

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<{ orderId: string; userId: string }>('process-order');
```

### `TDeps`

The shape of the dependencies object passed as the second argument to `.execute()`. Must extend `BaseFlowDependencies`, which optionally includes `db?: DatabaseClient` and `eventPublisher?: FlowEventPublisher`. Provide them when your flow uses `.transaction()` or `.event()` steps.

Defaults to `never` — when you omit `TDeps`, TypeScript won't require any specific dependencies. Once you use `.transaction()` or `.event()` steps, you'll need to provide a concrete type that satisfies the contract.

```typescript
type Deps = {
  db: DatabaseClient;
  eventPublisher: FlowEventPublisher;
};

const flow = createFlow<{ orderId: string }, Deps>('process-order');
```

## Returns

A `FlowBuilder` instance with the following initial state:
- State type: `{}` (empty)
- Break outputs: `never` (no early exits defined yet)

Chain builder methods (`.step()`, `.validate()`, etc.) to define the flow, then call `.build()`.

## Example

```typescript
import { createFlow } from '@celom/prose';

const flow = createFlow<{ email: string }>('onboard-user')
  .step('create', async (ctx) => {
    const user = await db.createUser(ctx.input.email);
    return { user };
  })
  .build();

const result = await flow.execute(
  { email: 'alice@example.com' },
  { db }
);
```
