apps/docs/src/content/docs/core-concepts.mdx, before:

---
title: Core Concepts
description: Understand how flows, steps, state threading, and the builder pattern work in Prose.
---

## Flows

A **flow** is a named sequence of steps that processes an input and produces an output. Think of it as a typed pipeline for business operations — order processing, user onboarding, payment handling, etc.

```typescript
import { createFlow } from '@celom/prose';

const flow = createFlow<{ email: string }>('onboard-user');
```

The generic parameter defines the input type. The string argument is the flow's name, used in error messages, logging, and observability.

## Steps

**Steps** are the building blocks of a flow. Each step receives a context object and can return new state to merge.

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<{ email: string }>('onboard-user')
  .step('createUser', async (ctx) => {
    const user = await db.create({ email: ctx.input.email });
    return { user };
  })
  .step('sendWelcome', async (ctx) => {
    await mailer.send(ctx.state.user.email, 'Welcome!');
    return { welcomed: true };
  })
  .build();
```

Prose provides several step types:

| Method | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `.step()` | Regular step — runs always, returns state to merge |
| `.validate()` | Validation step — runs before processing, never retried |
| `.stepIf()` | Conditional step — runs only when condition is true |
| `.transaction()` | Transaction step — wraps handler in `db.transaction()` |
| `.parallel()` | Parallel step — runs multiple handlers concurrently |

## State threading

The core design of Prose is **type-safe state threading**. Each step's return value is shallow-merged into the accumulated state, and TypeScript tracks the types through the entire chain.

```typescript
createFlow<{ orderId: string }>('process-order')
  .step('fetch', async (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state is {} (empty)
    const order = await db.getOrder(ctx.input.orderId);
    return { order };           // state becomes { order: Order }
  })
  .step('charge', async (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state is { order: Order } — fully typed!
    const receipt = await payments.charge(ctx.state.order.total);
    return { receipt };         // state becomes { order: Order; receipt: Receipt }
  })
  .step('notify', async (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state is { order: Order; receipt: Receipt }
    await notify(ctx.state.order.email, ctx.state.receipt.id);
    // returning nothing is fine — state unchanged
  })
  .build();
```

Steps that return `void` or `undefined` don't modify the state. The state type only grows — it's never narrowed.

## The context object

Every step handler receives a `FlowContext` with four properties:

```typescript
interface FlowContext<TInput, TDeps, TState> {
  readonly input: Readonly<TInput>;   // original input, never changes
  state: TState;                       // accumulated state from prior steps
  deps: TDeps;                         // injected dependencies
  meta: FlowMeta;                      // runtime metadata
  signal: AbortSignal;                 // combined abort signal
}
```

### `ctx.input`

The original input passed to `.execute()`. It's `Readonly` — steps cannot mutate it.

### `ctx.state`

The accumulated state from all prior steps. Each step's return value is shallow-merged into this object.

### `ctx.deps`

Dependencies injected via the second argument to `.execute()`. Common examples include database clients, event publishers, and external API clients.

### `ctx.meta`

Runtime metadata about the current execution:

```typescript
interface FlowMeta {
  flowName: string;        // the flow's name
  currentStep: string;     // current step name
  startedAt: Date;         // when the flow started
  correlationId: string;   // auto-generated or custom
}
```

### `ctx.signal`

An `AbortSignal` that combines the flow timeout, step timeout, and any external signal. Pass it to `fetch`, database queries, or check `ctx.signal.aborted` for cooperative cancellation.

## Builder pattern

Flows are constructed using a fluent builder pattern. Chain methods to add steps, then call `.build()` to create an executable flow definition.

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<Input, Deps>('name')
  .step(...)
  .step(...)
  .withRetry(...)
  .event(...)
  .map(...)
  .build();
```

The builder is immutable — each method returns a new builder instance. This makes it safe to branch and reuse partial builders.

### Output transformation with `.map()`

By default, `.execute()` returns the full accumulated state. Use `.map()` to transform it into a custom output shape:

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<{ id: string }>('get-user')
  .step('fetch', async (ctx) => {
    const user = await db.getUser(ctx.input.id);
    return { user };
  })
  .map((input, state) => ({
    id: state.user.id,
    displayName: state.user.name,
  }))
  .build();

// result is { id: string; displayName: string }
const result = await flow.execute({ id: 'u_1' }, {});
```

### Composing with `.pipe()`

Extract reusable step sequences as functions and compose them with `.pipe()`:

```typescript
function withAuth(builder) {
  return builder
    .step('validateToken', async (ctx) => {
      const session = await auth.verify(ctx.input.token);
      return { session };
    });
}

const flow = createFlow<{ token: string }>('protected')
  .pipe(withAuth)
  .step('doWork', (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state.session is typed
  })
  .build();
```

See the [Sub-flows guide](/prose/guides/sub-flows/) for more details.

Commit message:

docs: enhance documentation and examples, add MCP server guide, and improve type definitions

apps/docs/src/content/docs/core-concepts.mdx, after:

---
title: Core Concepts
description: Understand how flows, steps, state threading, and the builder pattern work in Prose.
---

## Flows

A **flow** is a named sequence of steps that processes an input and produces an output. Think of it as a typed pipeline for business operations — order processing, user onboarding, payment handling, etc.

```typescript
import { createFlow } from '@celom/prose';

const flow = createFlow<{ email: string }>('onboard-user');
```

The generic parameter defines the input type. The string argument is the flow's name, used in error messages, logging, and observability.

## Steps

**Steps** are the building blocks of a flow. Each step receives a context object and can return new state to merge.

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<{ email: string }>('onboard-user')
  .step('createUser', async (ctx) => {
    const user = await db.create({ email: ctx.input.email });
    return { user };
  })
  .step('sendWelcome', async (ctx) => {
    await mailer.send(ctx.state.user.email, 'Welcome!');
    return { welcomed: true };
  })
  .build();
```

Prose provides several step types:

| Method | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `.step()` | Regular step — runs always, returns state to merge |
| `.validate()` | Validation step — runs before processing, never retried |
| `.stepIf()` | Conditional step — runs only when condition is true |
| `.transaction()` | Transaction step — wraps handler in `deps.db.transaction()`, passing the ORM's native transaction client as `tx` |
| `.parallel()` | Parallel step — runs multiple handlers concurrently |

## State threading

The core design of Prose is **type-safe state threading**. Each step's return value is shallow-merged into the accumulated state, and TypeScript tracks the types through the entire chain.

```typescript
createFlow<{ orderId: string }>('process-order')
  .step('fetch', async (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state is {} (empty)
    const order = await db.getOrder(ctx.input.orderId);
    return { order };           // state becomes { order: Order }
  })
  .step('charge', async (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state is { order: Order } — fully typed!
    const receipt = await payments.charge(ctx.state.order.total);
    return { receipt };         // state becomes { order: Order; receipt: Receipt }
  })
  .step('notify', async (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state is { order: Order; receipt: Receipt }
    await notify(ctx.state.order.email, ctx.state.receipt.id);
    // returning nothing is fine — state unchanged
  })
  .build();
```

Steps that return `void` or `undefined` don't modify the state. The state type only grows — it's never narrowed.

## The context object

Every step handler receives a `FlowContext` with four properties:

```typescript
interface FlowContext<TInput, TDeps, TState> {
  readonly input: Readonly<TInput>;   // original input, never changes
  state: TState;                       // accumulated state from prior steps
  deps: TDeps;                         // injected dependencies
  meta: FlowMeta;                      // runtime metadata
  signal: AbortSignal;                 // combined abort signal
}
```

### `ctx.input`

The original input passed to `.execute()`. It's `Readonly` — steps cannot mutate it.

### `ctx.state`

The accumulated state from all prior steps. Each step's return value is shallow-merged into this object.

### `ctx.deps`

Dependencies injected via the second argument to `.execute()`. Prose defines a base contract (`BaseFlowDependencies`) with optional `db?: DatabaseClient` and `eventPublisher?: FlowEventPublisher` properties — provide them when your flow uses `.transaction()` or `.event()` steps. You extend this with your own dependencies (API clients, repositories, etc). See [Types](/prose/api/types/) and [Database Transactions](/prose/guides/transactions/) for details.

### `ctx.meta`

Runtime metadata about the current execution:

```typescript
interface FlowMeta {
  flowName: string;         // the flow's name
  startedAt: Date;          // when the flow started
  currentStep?: string;     // current step name
  correlationId?: string;   // custom, passed via execute options
}
```

### `ctx.signal`

An `AbortSignal` that combines the flow timeout, step timeout, and any external signal. Pass it to `fetch`, database queries, or check `ctx.signal.aborted` for cooperative cancellation.

## Builder pattern

Flows are constructed using a fluent builder pattern. Chain methods to add steps, then call `.build()` to create an executable flow definition.

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<Input, Deps>('name')
  .step(...)
  .step(...)
  .withRetry(...)
  .event(...)
  .map(...)
  .build();
```

The builder is immutable — each method returns a new builder instance. This makes it safe to branch and reuse partial builders.

### Output transformation with `.map()`

By default, `.execute()` returns the full accumulated state. Use `.map()` to transform it into a custom output shape:

```typescript
const flow = createFlow<{ id: string }>('get-user')
  .step('fetch', async (ctx) => {
    const user = await db.getUser(ctx.input.id);
    return { user };
  })
  .map((input, state) => ({
    id: state.user.id,
    displayName: state.user.name,
  }))
  .build();

// result is { id: string; displayName: string }
const result = await flow.execute({ id: 'u_1' }, {});
```

### Composing with `.pipe()`

Extract reusable step sequences as functions and compose them with `.pipe()`:

```typescript
function withAuth(builder) {
  return builder
    .step('validateToken', async (ctx) => {
      const session = await auth.verify(ctx.input.token);
      return { session };
    });
}

const flow = createFlow<{ token: string }>('protected')
  .pipe(withAuth)
  .step('doWork', (ctx) => {
    // ctx.state.session is typed
  })
  .build();
```

See the [Sub-flows guide](/prose/guides/sub-flows/) for more details.
